The beauty and depth of this subject cannot be described better than with the words of one of the greatest physicists of the 20th century, Arnold Sommerfeld, ''Thermodynamics is a funny subject. The first time you go through it, you don't understand it at all. The second time you go through it, you think you understand it, except for one or two points. The third time you go through it, you know you don't understand it, but by that time you are so used to the subject, it doesn't bother you anymore''. In this course we will venture into the depths of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, while concentrating on applications of the abstract concepts to biological, biochemical, and biophysical phenomena and drawing from contemporary bioengineering problems. This course provides an introduction to the study of energy transformations in biological systems as well as thermodynamics and kinetics of structure formation and association of biomolecules. Topics covered include energy and its transformation, the First and Second Law of Thermodynamics, Gibbs Free Energy, statistical thermodynamics, binding equilibria and reaction kinetics, and a survey of other interesting areas of biological thermodynamics, particularly the origin of life on Earth. Topics have relevance to numerous pertinent biological/bioengineering applications including diseases based on phase transitions (e.g., cataract of the eye, Alzheimer's disease, etc.), oxygenation of hemoglobin; protein folding, aggregation, and binding; assembly of everything from the phospholipids bilayer to biomaterials; the macroscopic mechanical properties of biomaterials and even cells; creation and operation of devices at the nano- and micro-scales; understanding the basis of mass transport; osmotic pressure relevant to cells and microvascular filtration; receptor-ligand binding; the melting and annealing of DNA. The concepts employed in this course have relevance to students interested in many disciplines, including Bioengineering, Materials Science, Biology and Chemistry.
This course is cross-listed as ENGR 3650.